
Comparing runs helps to identify feature associated with experimental factors. EBI Metagenomics provides, on the Project page, a number of abundance summary tables (described at ‘What are the format of the abundance matrix files accessible on the Analysis summary tab from the project page?’) that contains the number of reads, or predicted CDS, associated with taxonomic, or functional, annotations (described at ‘Taxonomic analysis using EBI Metagenomics’ and ‘Functional analysis using EBI Metagenomics’, respectively).
In addition, to facilitate functional comparison between runs of a single study, EBI Metagenomics has developed a Comparison Tool accessible from any EBI Metagenomics webpage.
This tools allows user to compare the GO-slim terms (described at ‘Finding functional information about runs on the EMG website’) associated with the runs of a public project. We are working with collaborators to develop this tool in order to be able to compare taxonomic annotations, provide statistical validations, compare runs between projects and extend it to private projects.
To use the current tool, select the corresponding tab from any EMG webpage. The first step is to select the project of interest. They are listed by title alphabetical order. You can search the project list by clicking on it or entering the first letters of the project you’re interested in. You can check if you selected the expected projects by clicking on the ‘More info about selected project’ link, located below the Project list, which will open a new browser tab for this project.
Upon project selection, the Run list window will be populated with the runs associated with the project. All runs suitable to compare using the tool will be listed in black while the runs non-suitable (i.e. without functional annotations) will be greyed. You can select all runs (using the ‘Select all’ link below the window) or any number you choose (by using the Ctrl key for Windows PC or Command key on Mac). Users can select the ‘Advanced settings’ link to have the options to set the relative abundance threshold for the GO terms to appear in the stack columns, the format of heatmap generated and the number of GO terms with most variation to display in the representations. To start the comparison for your selection, simply click on ‘Compare’.
The tool will generate the representations on the fly. Once this is done, the page displays the selected runs and project. There is 5 new tabs. The first one is a barcharts representation with 3 dynamic graphs, corresponding to the 3 GO terms categories. On each, the GO terms and their relative abundance in each selected run is displayed. Hovering the mouse pointer above a bar will display the relative abundance values for this term in the corresponding run. You can export these barcharts representation in PNF, PDF or SVG format using the tool on the top right hand side.
The second tab contains stacked column representations with the same dynamic properties than in the barcharts with the addition of the possibility to hide one or more terms of choice by selecting them from the list displayed each category graph.
The third tab presents heatmaps allowing to quickly identified patterns between the selected runs based on the relative abundance of the GO terms. There is currently no export function for this page although the images, being static, can be directly copied.
The fourth tab contains dynamic Principal Component Analysis graphs which represent the amount of variance, again based on the relative abundance of the GO terms, between the runs for each GO category. By selecting a region with the mouse pointer, you can zoom in, which help separating clustered runs. Using the export function will allow you to download the details you’re interested in.
The last tab is a searchable table where you can see the absolute and relative abundance of a given GO term for each run. It is based on the ‘Analysis_summary’ abundance table available from the project page. You can search the table using the run identifier, GO name, GO category, GO id or even absolute or relative abundance.
